PHYSICS 
P1. Electricity 
P1.1 Electrostatics: 
   a. Know and understand that insulators can be charged by friction. 
   b. Know and understand that charging is caused by gain or loss of electrons. 
   c. Know and understand that like charges repel and unlike charges attract. 
   d. Understand applications and hazards associated with electrostatics, including the 
role of earthing. 
P1.2 Electric circuits: 
   a. Know and recognise the basic circuit symbols and diagrams, including: cell, 
battery, light source, resistor, variable resistor, ammeter, voltmeter, switch, 
diode. 
   b. Understand the difference between alternating current (ac) and direct current 
(dc). 
   c. Understand the difference between conductors and insulators, and recall 
examples of each type. 
   d. Know and be able to apply:  current  =
charge
time ,  I  = 
Q
t
   e. Know and understand the use of voltmeters and ammeters. 
   f. Know and be able to apply:  resistance  = 
voltage
current ,  R  = 
I
V  
   g. Recall and interpret V–I graphs for a fixed resistor and a filament lamp. 
   h. Know the properties of NTC (negative temperature coefficient) thermistors, LDRs 
(light-dependent resistors) and ideal diodes. 
   i. Know and understand the current and voltage rules for series and parallel 
circuits. 
   j. Calculate the total resistance for resistor combinations in series. 
   k. Understand that the total resistance of a parallel combination is less than that of 
any individual resistor. 
   l. Know and be able to apply:  voltage = 
charge
energy , V = 
E
Q   
   m. Know and be able to apply:  power  =  current × voltage,  P =  IV = I 2R 
   n. Know and be able to apply:  energy transfer = power × time,  E = VIt 

P2. Magnetism 
P2.1  Properties of magnets: 
   a. Know and be able to use the terms north pole, south pole, attraction and 
repulsion. 
   b. Know the magnetic field pattern around a bar magnet (including direction). 
   c. Understand the difference between soft and hard magnetic materials (e.g. iron 
and steel). 
   d. Qualitatively understand induced magnetism. 
P2.2  Magnetic field due to an electric current: 
   a. Know and understand the magnetic effect of a current. 
   b. Know the magnetic field patterns around current-carrying wires (including 
direction) for straight wires and coils/solenoids. 
   c. Know and understand the factors affecting magnetic field strength around a wire. 
   d. Understand the difference between permanent magnets and electromagnets. 
P2.3  The motor effect: 
   a. Know that a wire carrying a current in a magnetic field can experience a force.  
   b. Know the factors affecting the direction of a force on a wire in a magnetic field 
(including the left-hand rule). 
   c. Know the factors affecting the m agnitude of the force on a wire in a magnetic 
field. 
   d. Know and be able to apply F = BIL for a straight wire at right angles to a uniform 
magnetic field. 
   e. Know and understand the construction and operation of a dc motor, including 
factors affecting the magnitude of the force produced. 
   f. Understand applications of electromagnets. 
P2.4  Electromagnetic induction: 
   a. Know and understand that a voltage is induced when a wire cuts magnetic field 
lines, or when a magnetic field changes. 
   b. Know the factors affecting the magnitude of an induced voltage. 
   c. Know the factors affecting the direction of an induced voltage.  
   d. Understand the operation of an ac generator, including factors affecting the 
output voltage. 
   e. Interpret the graphical representation of the output voltage of a simple ac 
generator. 
   f. Understand applications of electromagnetic induction. 

P2.5  Transformers: 
   a. Know and understand the terms step-up transformer and step-down transformer. 
     b. Know and use the relationship between the number of turns on the primary and 
secondary coils, and the voltage ratio:  
s
p
V
V
 = 
s
p
n
n  
   c. Know that a consequence of 100% effici ency is total transfer of electrical power, 
and that this gives rise to the following relationship: Vp Ip  = VsIs. Know and use 
this relationship to solve problems. 
    d. Understand power transmission, incl uding calculating losses during transmission 
and the need for high voltage. 
P3. Mechanics 
P3.1  Kinematics: 
   a. Know and understand the difference between scalar and vector quantities. 
    b. Know and understand the difference between distance and displacement and 
between speed and velocity. 
    c. Know and be able to apply:  speed = 
distance
time
,   
           velocity = 
change in displacement
time
   d. Know and be able to apply:  acceleration = 
change in velocity
time
   e. Interpret distance–time, displacement–time, speed–time and velocity–time 
graphs. 
     f. Perform calculations using gradients and areas under graphs. 
   g. Know and be able to apply:  average speed = 
total distance
time
   h. Know and be able to apply the equation of motion:  v 
2 – u 
2 = 2as 
P3.2  Forces: 
   a. Understand that there are different types of force, including weight, normal 
contact, drag (including air resistance), friction, magnetic, electrostatic, thrust, 
upthrust, lift and tension. 
   b. Know and understand the factors that can affect the magnitude and direction of 
the forces in 3.2a. 
   c. Draw and interpret force diagrams. 
   d. Qualitatively understand resultant force, with calculations in one dimension. 

P3.3  Force and extension: 
   a. Interpret force–extension graphs. 
   b. Understand elastic and inelastic extension, and elastic limits. 
    c. Know and be able to apply Hooke’s law ( F = k x), and understand the meaning of 
the limit of proportionality. 
   d. Understand energy stored in a stretched spring as:  E = xF2
1  = 2
2
1 xk  
P3.4  Newton’s laws: 
   a. Know and understand Newton’s first law as: ‘a body will remain at rest or in a 
state of uniform motion in a straight line unless acted on by a resultant external 
force’. 
   b. Understand mass as a property that resists change in motion (inertia). 
   c. Know and understand Newton’s second law as:  force = mass × acceleration 
   d. Know and understand Newton’s third law as: ‘if body A exerts a force on body B 
then body B exerts an equal and opposite force of the same type on body A’. 
P3.5  Mass and weight: 
   a. Know and understand the difference between mass and weight. 
   b. Know and be able to apply gravitational field strength, g, approximated as 
10
 N kg–1 on Earth. 
   c. Know and be able to apply the relationship between mass and weight:  w = mg 
   d. Understand free-fall acceleration. 
   e. Know the factors affecting air resistance. 
   f. Understand terminal velocity and the forces involved. 
P3.6  Momentum: 
   a. Know and be able to apply:  momentum =
 mass × velocity,  p = mv 
   b. Know and be able to use the law of cons ervation of momentum in calculations in 
one dimension. 
    c. Know and be able to apply:  force = rate of change of momentum 

P3.7  Energy: 
   a. Know and be able to apply:  work = force × distance moved (in direction of force) 
   b. Understand work done as a transfer of energy. 
  c. Know and be able to apply:  gravitational potential energy = mgh, where h is the 
difference in height of the object. 
   d. Know and be able to apply:  kinetic energy = 2
2
1 mv  
   e. Know and be able to apply:  power = 
energy transfer
time
   f. Know and be able to use in calculations the law of conservation of energy. 
   g. Understand the concepts of useful energy and wasted energy. 
   h. Know and be able to apply:  percentage efficiency = 
useful output
total input
 × 100 
P4. Thermal physics 
P4.1  Conduction: 
   a. Know and understand thermal conductors and insulators, with examples. 
   b. Know and be able to apply factors affecting rate of conduction. 
P4.2  Convection: 
   a. Understand and be able to apply the effect of temperature on density of fluid. 
   b. Understand and be able to apply fluid flow caused by differences in density. 
P4.3  Thermal radiation: 
   a. Understand thermal radiation as electromagnetic waves in the infrared region. 
   b. Know and be able to apply absorption and emission of radiation. 
   c. Know and be able to apply factors affecting rate of absorption and emission of 
thermal radiation. 
P4.4  Heat capacity: 
    a. Understand the effect of energy transferred to or from an object on its 
temperature. 
   b. Know and be able to apply: 
 specific heat capacity = 

thermal energy
mass temperature change
where temperature is measured in °C and specific heat capacity, c, is measured 
in J kg–1 °C–1. 

P5. Matter 
P5.1  States of matter: 
   a. Know the characteristic properties of solids, liquids and gases. 
   b. Know and be able to apply particle models of solids, liquids and gases. 
   c. Know and be able to explain properties of solids, liquids and gases in terms of 
particle motion and the forces and distances between the particles. 
P5.2  Ideal gases: 
    a. Be able to explain pressure and temperature in terms of the behaviour of 
particles. 
   b. Understand and be able to apply the effect of pressure ( P
 ) on gas volume (V ) at 
constant temperature, i.e. PV  = constant. 
P5.3  State changes: 
   a. Understand the terms melting point and boiling point. 
   b. Know and understand the terms latent heat of fusion and latent heat of 
vaporisation. 
   c. Know and be able to apply specific latent heat calculations. 
P5.4  Density: 
     a. Know and be able to apply:  density = 
volume
mass ,    = 
V
m  
   b. Understand the experimental determination of densities.   
   c. Be able to compare the densities of solids, liquids and gases. 
P5.5  Pressure: 
  a. Know and be able to apply:  pressure = 
area
force  
   b. Know and be able to apply:  hydrostatic pressure = hg, where h is the height, or 
depth, of the liquid. 

P6. Waves 
P6.1  Wave properties: 
   a. Understand the transfer of energy without net movement of matter. 
   b. Know and understand transverse and longitudinal waves. 
   c. Know and understand the terms: peak, trough, compression and rarefaction. 
   d. Recall examples of waves, including electromagnetic waves and sound. 
    e. Know and be able to use the terms: amplitude, wavelength, frequency and 
period. 
   f. Know and be able to apply:  frequency =
1
period
,  f = 
T
1  
   g. Know and be able to apply:  wave speed = 
distance
time
   h. Know and be able to apply:  wave speed = frequency × wavelength,  v = f  
P6.2  Wave behaviour: 
   a. Know and understand reflection at a surface. 
   b. Know and understand refraction at a boundary. 
   c. Know and understand the effect of reflection and refraction on the speed, 
frequency, wavelength and direction of waves. 
   d. Know and understand the analogy of reflection and refraction of light with that of 
water waves. 
   e. Know and understand the Doppler effect. 
P6.3  Optics: 
   a. Draw and interpret ray diagrams to describe reflection in plane mirrors. 
   b. Know and be able to apply:  angle of incidence = angle of reflection 
   c. Draw and interpret ray diagrams for refraction at a planar boundary. 
   d. Know and be able to interpret angle of incidence and angle of refraction. 
   e. Know and understand the effect of refraction on wave direction (away from or 
towards the normal) and speed (increasing or decreasing). 
P6.4  Sound waves: 
   a. Understand the production of sound waves by a vibrating source. 
   b. Understand the need for a medium. 
   c. Understand qualitatively the relation of loudness to amplitude and pitch to 
frequency. 
   d. Know and understand longitudinal waves. 
   e. Understand that reflection causes echoes. 
   f. Recall that the range of human hearing is 20
 Hz to 20 kHz. 
   g. Know and understand ultrasound and its uses (sonar and medical scanning). 

P6.5  Electromagnetic spectrum: 
   a. Know and understand the nature and properties of electromagnetic waves (they 
are transverse waves and travel at the speed of light in a vacuum). 
   b. Recall the component parts of the spectrum (radio waves, microwaves, IR, 
visible light, UV, X-rays, gamma). 
   c. Understand the distinction of the component parts by different wavelengths 
and/or frequencies. 
   d. Recall the order of the component parts by wavelength and/or frequency. 
   e. Understand applications and hazards of the component parts of the 
electromagnetic spectrum. 
P7. Radioactivity 
P7.1  Atomic structure: 
   a. Understand the atom in terms of protons, neutrons and electrons. 
   b. Know and be able to apply the nuclear model of atomic structure. 
   c. Know the relative charges and masses of protons, neutrons and electrons. 
   d. Understand and be able to use the terms atomic number and mass number. 
   e. Know and understand the term isotope. 
   f. Know and understand the term nuclide, and use nuclide notation. 
   g. Understand that ionisation is caused by the gain/loss of electrons. 
P7.2  Radioactive decay: 
   a. Know and understand that emissions arise from an unstable nucleus. 
   b. Know and understand the random nature of emissions. 
   c. Know and understand the differences between alpha, beta and gamma emission. 
   d. Know and understand the nature of alpha and beta particles, and gamma 
radiation. 
   e. Be able to use and interpret nuclear equations. 
   f. Know the effect of decay on atomic number and mass number. 
P7.3  Ionising radiation: 
   a. Know the relative penetrating abilities of alpha, beta and gamma radiation. 
   b. Know the relative ionising abilities of alpha, beta and gamma radiation. 
   c. Understand qualitatively the deflection of alpha, beta and gamma radiation in 
electric or magnetic fields. 
   d. Know and appreciate the existence of background radiation. 
   e. Understand the applications and hazards of ionising radiation.  

P7.4  Half-life: 
  a. Be able to interpret graphical representations of radioactive decay (including 
consideration of decay products). 
   b. Understand the meaning of the term half-life. 
   c. Understand and be able to apply half-life calculations. 