ENGINEERING AND SCIENCE ADMISSIONS TEST 
(ESAT) 
Content Specification 
For assessment in October 2026 and January 2027 

Overview 
The purpose of the Engineering and Science Admissions Test is to determine a candidate’s 
potential to achieve in an academically demanding undergraduate degree course. Questions draw 
upon a candidate’s ability to use and apply their scientific and mathematical knowledge. The test is 
designed to be challenging in order to differentiate effectively between able applicants, including 
those who might have achieved the highest possible grades in school examinations. 
Format 
The test consists of five modules: 
   Mathematics 1 
   Biology 
   Chemistry 
   Physics  
   Mathematics 2 
Most courses will require candidates to answer Mathematics 1 and two further modules. 
Candidates should carefully check the requirements of the course(s) to which they are 
applying. 
There are 27 multiple-choice questions in each module. The time allowed to complete each module 
is 40 minutes. Each module is separately timed. If a candidate finishes a module early, the time will 
not be carried over to the next module, so candidates should be careful to manage their time 
accordingly. 
The ESAT is a computer-based test. Candidates will be provided with an erasable booklet for 
working. Calculators may NOT be used. 

Content 
Questions will draw upon the topics listed for each module in Appendix 1. All modules will assume 
knowledge of the content of Mathematics 1. The knowledge assumed for each module is 
summarised: 
Module Knowledge assumed 
Mathematics 1 topics labelled ‘M’ in Appendix 1 
Biology topics labelled ‘B’, and topics labelled ‘M’, in Appendix 1 
Chemistry topics labelled ‘C’, and topics labelled ‘M’, in Appendix 1 
Physics topics labelled ‘P’, and topics labelled ‘M’, in Appendix 1 
Mathematics 2 topics labelled ‘M’, and topics labelled ‘MM’, in Appendix 1 
Candidates are expected to apply conceptual knowledge to solve problems. Some questions 
involve the straightforward application of this knowledge, but others require more creative thinking 
and the application of principles in less familiar contexts. 
Scoring 
In all modules, each correct answer will score 1 mark. No marks are deducted for incorrect answers. 
Results for each module will be reported separately. 

Scientific Quantities and Units 
Throughout this specification, it should be assumed that, where mention is made of a particular 
quantity, knowledge of the SI unit of that quantity is also expected (including the relationship of the 
unit to other SI units through the equations linking their quantities).  
Candidates will be expected to be familiar with the following SI prefixes when used in connection 
with any SI unit: 
nano- 10 –9 
micro- 10 –6 
milli- 10 –3 
centi- 10 –2 
deci- 10 –1 
kilo- 10 3 
mega- 10 6 
giga- 10 9 
Candidates are expected to be familiar with the use of negative indices in units, for example m s–1 
for velocity. 

APPENDIX 1: KNOWLEDGE ASSUMED  
The material that follows outlines the scientific and mathematical knowledge assessed in the 
Engineering and Science Admissions Test.  