BIOLOGY 
B1. Cells 
B1.1 Know and understand the structure and function of the main sub-cellular components of 
eukaryotic cells (both animal and plant) including:  
   a. cell membrane 
   b. cytoplasm 
   c. nucleus 
   d. mitochondrion 
   e. cell wall (plant only) 
    f. chloroplast (plant only) 
   g. vacuole (plant only) 
B1.2 Know and understand the structure and function of the main sub-cellular components of 
prokaryotic cells (bacteria) including:  
   a. cell membrane 
   b. cytoplasm 
   c. cell wall 
   d. chromosomal DNA/no ‘true’ nucleus 
   e. plasmid DNA 
B1.3 Know and understand the levels of organisation within organisms as: cells to tissues to 
organs to organ systems. 
B2. Movement across membranes 
B2.1 Know and understand the processes of diffusion, osmosis (in terms of water potential), 
and active transport, including examples in living and non-living systems. 
B3. Cell division and sex determination 
B3.1 Mitosis and the cell cycle: 
  a. Know and understand that the mitotic cell cycle includes interphase (involving 
cell growth and DNA replication) and mitosis (involving one cell division leading 
to two daughter cells which are genetically identical to each other and to the 
parental cell). 

   b. Know and understand the importance of mitosis in the growth of an organism: 
specifically, its roles in increasing the number of cells, repairing tissues, replacing 
cells and asexual reproduction. 
  c. Know and understand that cancer is the result of changes in cells, including 
mutations, that lead to uncontrolled cell division. 
B3.2 Meiosis and the cell cycle: 
  a. Know and understand that the meiotic cell cycle includes interphase (involving 
cell growth and DNA replication) and meiosis (involving two cell divisions leading 
to four daughter cells, each with a single copy of each chromosome). 
  b. Know and understand the role of meiosis in producing genetically different 
haploid gametes so that the zygote (fertilised egg cell) produced at fertilisation is 
diploid.  
B3.3 Asexual and sexual reproduction: 
 a. Know and understand that asexual reproduction involves one parent and that 
offspring are genetically identical when no mutations occur. 
 b.  Know and understand that sexual reproduction involves two parents and that 
offspring are genetically different in relation to each other and the parents, 
leading to (increased) variation. 
B3.4 Sex determination: 
  a. Know that, in most mammals including humans, females are XX and males 
are XY. 
   b. Analyse genetic data and diagrams to establish the sex and ratio of offspring.  

B4. Inheritance 
B4.1 Know and understand the nucleus as a site of genetic material in eukaryotic cells. 
B4.2 Know and understand the following genetic terms: 
   a. gene 
   b. allele 
   c. dominant 
   d. recessive 
   e. heterozygous 
   f. homozygous 
   g. phenotype 
   h. genotype 
   i. chromosome 
   j. autosome 
B4.3 Monohybrid crosses: 
  a. Use and interpret genetic data and diagrams involving monohybrid (single gene) 
crosses. 
  b. Use and interpret family trees/pedigrees and express outcomes as ratios, 
numbers, probabilities or percentages. 
   c. Understand the concept of inherited conditions. 
  d. Know that most phenotypes are the result of multiple genes and only some result 
from single gene inheritance. 
B5. DNA 
B5.1 Know and understand that 
   a. the genome is the full set of genetic material (DNA) of an organism. 
   b. this DNA is contained within chromosomes. 
B5.2 Know and understand the structure of DNA: 
 a. Know and understand that single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) is a polymer made up 
of nucleotides joined together to form one strand of DNA. 
  b. Know and understand that double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) is a polymer made up 
of two strands of DNA forming a double helix. 
  c. Know and understand that the structure of each nucleotide consists of a common 
sugar and phosphate group as well as one of four different nitrogenous bases.  

  d. Know the complementary pairs of DNA nitrogenous bases – adenine (A) pairs 
with thymine (T) and guanine (G) pairs with cytosine (C) – and that the sequence 
of these bases is the genetic code. 
B5.3 Protein synthesis:  
  a. Know and understand that protein synthes is involves producing chains of amino 
acids called polypeptides. 
  b. Know and understand that one or more polypeptide(s) can form a functional 
protein.  
  c. Know and understand that the three-dimensional shape of a protein is 
determined by the sequence of its amino acids.  
  d. Know and understand that the sequence of nucleotide bases in a gene 
determines the sequence of amino acids in the polypeptide the gene codes for. 
  e. Know and understand that the sequence of nucleotides in a gene is ‘read’ as 
triplets, and that each triplet codes for an amino acid. 
B5.4 Gene mutations: 
   a. Understand that a mutation changes the sequence of nucleotides in the DNA. 
  b. Know that most mutations have no effect on the phenotype, some will have a 
small effect, whilst occasionally others will determine the phenotype.  
B6. Gene technologies 
B6.1 Genetic engineering: 
   a. Understand the process of genetic engineering to include: 
       i. taking a copy of a gene from the DNA of one organism 
       ii. insertion of that gene into the DNA of another organism 
       iii. the roles of restriction enzymes and ligases in recombining DNA. 
   b. Recall and interpret examples of genetic engineering in different cell types. 
  c. Explain the benefits and risks of using genetic engineering in medical 
applications. 
B6.2 Stem cells: 
 a. Know and understand that some early embryonic cells are totipotent and have 
the potential to develop into a complete multicellular organism. 
 b. Know and understand that most embryonic stem cells are pluripotent and can 
differentiate into any cell type. 
 c. Know and understand that adult stem cells are multipotent and can differentiate 
into a limited number of different cell types.   
 d. Know and understand the likely benefits and risks of using stem cells in medical 
applications. 

B6.3 Selective breeding: 
  a.  Know and understand the differences and similarities between natural selection 
and selective breeding.  
  b. Understand the impact of selective breeding on populations. 
B7. Variation 
B7.1 Natural selection and evolution: 
  a. Know that there is usually extensive genetic variation within a population of a 
species. 
  b. Describe evolution as a change in the inherited characteristics of a population 
over time through a process of natural selection which may result in the 
formation of a new species. 
  c. Know and understand how evolution can occur through natural selection of 
variants that give rise to phenotypes best suited to their environment. 
  d. Know and understand that antibiotic resistance in bacteria is an example of 
evolution through natural selection.  
B7.2 Sources of variation: 
  a. Understand that variation can be genetic/inherited, resulting in a range of 
phenotypes. 
  b. Understand that variation can also be environmental, which affects a range of 
phenotypes. 
B8. Enzymes 
B8.1 Know and understand that enzymes are primar ily proteins that function as biological 
catalysts. 
B8.2 Know and understand the general mechanism of enzyme action, including the role of the 
active site and enzyme specificity. 
B8.3 Know and understand how the factors of temperature and pH can affect the rate of 
enzyme action. 
B8.4 Know the role of amylases, proteases and lipases in the digestion of carbohydrates, 
proteins and fats. 

B9. Animal physiology 
B9.1 Respiration: 
  a. Know and understand the process of cellular respiration in living cells. 
  b. Know and understand the process of aerobic respiration in living cells, including 
the word equation. 
  c. Know and understand the process of anaerobic respiration in animal cells, 
including the word equation. 
B9.2 Organ systems: 
   a. Nervous system: 
      i. Know and understand that the central nervous system comprises the brain 
and spinal cord. 
       ii. Know and understand the structure and function of sensory neurones, 
relay neurones, motor neurones, synapses and the reflex arc. 
   b. Respiratory system: 
      i. Know and understand the structure and function of the respiratory 
(breathing) system, including the structure of the thorax. 
       ii. Understand the processes of ventilation and gas exchange. 
      iii. Know and understand the importance of a high surface area  : volume ratio 
for the gas exchange process. 
   c. Circulatory system: 
      i. Know and understand the structure and function of the circulatory system, 
including the structure of the heart, characteristics of heart rate, ECGs, and 
the main types of blood vessel (arteries, veins and capillaries). 
      ii. Know and understand the composition and function of the blood (red blood 
cells carry oxygen; white blood cells are involved in antibody production 
and phagocytosis; platelets are involved in blood clotting; and plasma is 
involved both in the transport of blood components and other dissolved 
substances including hormones, antibodies, urea and carbon dioxide, and 
in the distribution of heat). 
       iii. Know and understand the relationship with the gaseous exchange system. 
      iv. Know and understand the need for exchange surfaces and a transport 
system in multicellular organisms in terms of surface area
 : volume ratio. 
   d. Digestive system: 
       i. Know and understand the structure and function of the digestive system. 
      ii. Know and understand the processes of peristalsis, digestion, absorption 
and egestion. 

   e. Excretory system: 
      i. Know and understand the structure and function of the excretory system, 
including the kidney and the main components of the nephron. 
       ii. Understand the role of the kidneys in homeostasis. 
B9.3 Homeostasis: 
   a. Know that homeostasis is the maintenance of a constant internal environment, 
and appreciate its importance in multicellular animals. 
    b. Understand the concept of negative feedback in the context of homeostasis. 
   c. Know and understand the regulation of blood glucose levels, including the role of 
insulin and glucagon. 
   d. Understand the main features of type 1 and type 2 diabetes, and how type 1 
diabetes can be treated. 
   e. Know and understand the regulation of water content (including the role of ADH) 
and the regulation of body temperature. 
B9.4 Hormones: 
   a. Know and understand that hormones are released from specific endocrine 
glands and travel via the blood to their target structures. 
   b. Know and understand the main role of adrenaline in the body. 
    c. Know and understand the roles of hormones in human reproduction including: 
       i. those involved in the menstrual cycle (FSH, LH, oestrogen and 
progesterone). 
       ii. those used for contraception, and the differences between hormonal and 
non-hormonal forms of contraception. 
B9.5 Disease and body defence: 
     a. Communicable diseases: 
       i. Know that communicable diseases are caused by pathogenic bacteria, 
viruses, protists and fungi. 
       ii. Understand the transmission routes of sexually transmitted infections, 
including the effect on the immune system of HIV which results in AIDS. 
      iii. Understand the treatment of disease, including the use of antibiotics, 
vaccines (role of dead and inactive pathogens, antibody production and 
formation of memory cells) and techniques to prevent the spread of 
pathogens including HIV. 
      iv. Understand the process of discovery and development of new medicines 
and vaccines, including pre-clinical and clinical testing. 

    b. Non-communicable diseases: 
      i. Know that the following diseases are caused by the interaction of many 
factors: cardiovascular disease, many forms of cancer, some lung and liver 
diseases and diseases influenced by nutrition, including type 2 diabetes. 
      ii. Know that cardiovascular disease can be treated/managed using lifelong 
medication (including statins, anti-coagulants and anti-hypertensive drugs), 
surgical procedures (including stents and bypass for coronary heart 
disease), and lifestyle changes (including reducing smoking, more exercise 
and a balanced diet). 
B10. Ecosystems 
B10.1 Levels of organisation in an ecosystem: 
   a. Know and understand the organisation of levels within an ecosystem from 
individuals through to populations, and from communities through to ecosystems. 
   b. Know and understand how communities can be affected by abiotic and biotic 
factors. 
    c. Know and understand the factors that can cause a population to change in size. 
   d. Understand the importance of interdependence in ecosystems (relating to 
predation, mutualism and parasitism) and of competition in a community. 
   e. Know and understand that photosynt hetic organisms are the primary producers 
of food in an ecosystem, and therefore biomass. 
B10.2 Material cycling: 
   a. Know and understand the carbon cycle, including the importance of the following 
processes: 
       i. photosynthesis 
       ii. respiration 
       iii. combustion 
       iv. decomposition 
   b. Understand the importance of the water cycle to living organisms. 
B10.3 Biodiversity: 
   a. Know and understand how quadrats and belt transects are used to investigate 
the distribution and abundance of organisms in a habitat, and interpret data from 
their use.  
   b. Know and understand how to determine the number of organisms in a given 
area.  
   c. Know and understand the positive and negative human interactions in an 
ecosystem, including fish farming, acid rain and eutrophication, and explain their 
impact on biodiversity.  

B11. Plant physiology 
B11.1 Importance of photosynthesis: 
    a. Know and understand the process of photosynthesis as an endothermic reaction 
that uses light energy to react carbon dioxide and water to produce glucose and 
oxygen. 
   b. Understand the effect of temperature, light intensity and carbon dioxide 
concentration as limiting factors on the rate of photosynthesis. 
B11.2 Transport systems in plants: 
    a. Know and understand how the structures of xylem and phloem are adapted to 
their functions in plants, including the role of: 
       i. lignified dead cells in xylem tissue in the transport of water and mineral 
ions from the roots to the stems and leaves. 
       ii. living cells in phloem tissue in the transport of dissolved sugars from the 
leaves to the rest of the plant for immediate use or storage. 
    b. Know and understand how water and mineral ions are taken up by plants, and 
relate the structure of root hair cells to their function in this. 
    c. Know and understand the processes of transpiration and translocation, including 
the structure and function of the stomata. 
    d. Know and understand the effect of environmental factors on the rate of water 
uptake by a plant, including light intensity, air movement, humidity and 
temperature. 
     e. Calculate the rate of transpiration as: 
rate of transpiration ൌ  volume of water
time taken